Dealing with Lisp errors
------------------------ 
By "a Lisp error" we mean that O-Plan or the Lisp system invokes the
Lisp error signalling mechanism rather than, say, just printing a
message.  Unless the error is caused by an erroneous command typed
into the Lisp interaction window, it is usually due to a bug in
O-Plan and should be reported.

Your options for dealing with the Lisp error depend on what O-Plan
was doing when it occurred.

When a Lisp error occurs in the TF compiler, a menu will appear to
make sure you notice the error.  There will be only one option, "ok".
Select "ok" to continue.  The TF compiler will exit and report that
the file contained an error.  That is, a Lisp error is treated as if
it were a single syntax error that applied to the whole TF file.

When the error occurs in some other part of the planner, there is
typically no neat way to recover from it, and a more complex menu
appears.  It will look something like this:

   Lisp error in process <process-name>
   ------------------------------------
   Allow the error
   Return to scheduler
   Force global reset

<Process-name> will be replaced by the name of the process that was
running when the error occurred: :AM, :DM, :KP, etc.  You should
look in the window associated with that process to see the error
message.  The meanings of the options are as follows:

   Allow the error
     Allow Lisp to handle the error.  This will usually result in
     a "break loop" as described below.  Select this option if you
     plan to report the bug, because the bug report should include
     a "backtrace" (also described below).

   Return to scheduler
     Exit the process in which the error occurred so that the
     system can continue running.  In most cases, this will not
     work very well, because the process in which the error
     occurred needed to finish some task that was interrupted by
     the error.  This sort of recovery can also be attempted from
     a break loop, as described below (again).

   Force global reset
     Attempt to reinitialise O-Plan.  This will abandon the attempt
     to find a plan (or whatever O-Plan was doing) and start over as
     if you had selected the "Initialise planner" option in the TA.
     It is equivalent to evaluating the Lisp expression (force-reset).

When the Lisp system handles an error, Lisp usually enters a "break
loop" in one of the O-Plan windows.  Ordinarily, you will see a menu
first, as described above.  In any case, you can tell that Lisp has
entered a break by the following signs:

  1. O-Plan will stop producing any output.
  2. The one-line "running processes" window will stop changing.
  3. There will be an error message in a window associated with
     the rightmost name in the "running processes" window.
  4. The window will be displaying the ">" prompt.

The first two can also happen when O-Plan is merely taking a long
time to do something; the others cannot.

In a break loop, the normal ways of exiting O-Plan by using the
control panel or the TA menu will not work.  However, you can type
Lisp debugger commands and Lisp expressions in the the window, after
the ">" prompt.  Typing

  (exit-oplan)

should cause O-Plan to exit.

  (force-reset)

attempts to reset the system by wiping out all pending messages,
sending itself an :INIT message, and returning to the process
scheduler.

If you're planing to report a bug, you should get a "backtrace"
before exiting.  It shows the nested Lisp procedure calls that
led up to the error.  Get a backtrace by typing ":b" after the ">"
prompt.  Grab the resulting output and the error message with the 
mouse and put them both in the bug report.

In some cases you can (and may want to) get O-Plan to continue after an
error.  This is most likely to be so when the error is in a relatively
peripheral part of the planner, such as the PW viewer, but it can
happen in other cases too.

In some cases, the Lisp system will offer you a reasonable way to
continue from the error, so always look at the options that appear
after the error message.

Another form of recovery that sometimes makes sense is to get O-Plan
to abandon its current activity and allow other parts of the system
to run.  You can accomplish this by selecting "Return to pprocess
scheduler" from the restart options presented after the Lisp error
message.  (This is equivalent to choosing "Return to scheduler"
from the menu appears when the error is first noticed.)

This approach should be tried only when the error occurs during a
relatively self-contained activity.  An example might be a Lisp error
when the PlanWorld Viewer tried to display a plan.  By returning
control the the scheduler, you could get the viewer to abandon this
attempt This would work fairly well because nothing else in the system
depends very strongly on the viewer succeeding.  On the other hand, it
would not work very well if, for instance, the DM ran into an error
somewhere deep in the TOME/GOST manager.  In such cases, you might try
typing the command (force-reset) instead.

