Instructions for 3.1 prebuilt in KCL
------------------------------------

If you want to use O-Plan version 3.1 but do not have Lucid Common
Lisp, you can use a version that has been compiled and built in KCL
(actually in GCL 1.1).  It is packaged in a gzipped tar file together
with statically linked versions of the two C programs used with
O-Plan: xmenu and xuim.

Since the KCL O-Plan is already in executable form, you do not
need any Lisp system in order to use it.

The statically linked programs are useful if you are, for some
reason, unable to build them from the sources supplied with
O-Plan.

You will need a Sun4 running version 4.1.3 of SunOS.  The system
should also work under Solaris, although Solaris seems to create
problems for the windows O-Plan creates when it starts up.  If lines
printed in those windows fail to end in newlines, and text therefore
marches ever further to the right, then you are experiencing that
problem.  The problem will be fixed at some point, but for now it
remains.  However, apart from that, O-Plan will still run correctly.

To use the prebuilt release, you will need to

 1. Get a copy of the ordinary O-plan release tar file and the
    "prebuilt in KCL" release tar file:

      oplan-3.1-31Jan97.tar.gz

      oplan-3.1-kcl-05Feb97.tar.gz

   You can get them via

      http://www.aiai.ed.ac.uk/~oplan/release/

 2. Make a (new) directory to contain the O-Plan files and
    unpack the release tar file there, e.g. as follows:

      zcat oplan-3.1-31Jan97.tar.gz | tar xpf -

 3. In the same directory, unpack the prebuilt release.

      zcat oplan-3.1-kcl-05Feb97.tar.gz | tar xpf -

    This will accomplish something equivalent to what "make all install"
    does in the normal install procedure.  (See the INSTALL file in
    the O-Plan distribution.)  Do not follow the instructions in
    that file.

 4. Edit the file bin/oplan to indicate the directory in which
    you have unpacked the files.  For instance:

      base_dir=/home/oplan//3.1/

The script bin/oplan is what you should use to run O-Plan.  Put a copy
of it, or a symbolic link to it, in an appropriate directory in your
PATH.  To test the system after step 4 above, just type

     bin/oplan

A number of windows should appear, and the prompt "form> " will be
printed in the window in which you typed bin/oplan.

Here is a minimal test:

In the upper left of the screen there will be a window with the title
"O-Plan Task Assignment".  In that window should be a textual menu
with some numbered items followed by the prompt "Please choose a
number:- ".  Item 1 should be labeled "Initialise Planner".  There
will be an asterisk ("*") in front of the "1", but not in front of
the "2" in the line below.

Go to that window and type the character "1" followed by return.
Small changes should happen in some of the windows and after that
there will be a "*" in front of the "2" as well as the "1".

Now exit O-Plan by clicking on the "QUIT" button in the control
panel (which should be at the top center of the screen).  O-Plan
should exit and all the windows it created should disappear.

